---
layout: page
title: Radio Transmitters and Receivers
summary: Your link with the car.
---

Controllers Style
=================

There are two styles of transmitters: steer wheels and sticks. The choice
between the two really seems to be a matter of taste, although there seems to
be trends? In North America, almost everyone was using steer wheels, but here
in the UK, sticks are the most prevalent. I feel like my thumbs are just, well,
all thumbs, so I feel my other fingers have more dexterity, but then, people
using sticks beat me all the time, so... :-)

Frequencies
===========

There used to be a number of frequencies, in the 27 MHz and 49 MHz bands, you
had to make sure no two racers used the same frequency, and tracks would each
have an etiquette to follow to avoid this situation, but this has pretty all
been replaced with the new 2.4 GHz frequencies. This is the same frequencies as
WiFi, and radios of that generation are "frequency hopping", which means that
through some witchcraft I do not understand, they all work together without
interference. So, whatever radio you get, make sure it uses the 2.4 GHz
frequencies, which will make this completely simple to use.

Adjustments
===========

Two essential adjustments are end point adjustments and exponential settings.
The end point adjustments limit how much the steering servo can move,
protecting it if it cannot go through its entire range of movement (this
depends on the steering arrangement of your car).

Exponential settings is a bit harder to understand, but lets you increase or
reduce the sensitivity around the center position, making the car easier to
handle. It does not change the speed at which the servo will move, but
"exchanges" sensitivity between the center and the ends of the range. For
example, if you reduce the sensitivity at the center (which increases the
precision, as you need more control movement to get the same servo movement),
you'll find that at the extreme, a smaller move of your controller will yield
more servo movement (more sensitive, but harder to control, less precise, more
twitchy). This effect is tunable, and can be non-existent, subtle, or very
harsh, as you prefer.

Model Memories
==============

This feature allows your transmitter to pair with multiple receivers, so that
you can use a single transmitter with different cars. Each car will have its
own set of settings (including the end points and exponential), so that you can
easily jump from one car to the other.

Number of Channels
==================

The channels are used to transmit information to the receiver. For a racing
car, you need two: one for steering, and one for throttle/braking. Some other
models might need more channels, if they have four-wheel steering, for example,
or to control accessories (like lights, or a winch, say).

Refresh Rate
============

Older radios were analog, and so transmitted continuously, but a (small!)
downside of the newer 2.4 GHz radios is that they are now digital, transmitting
information in discrete bursts. Higher end radios will have a faster "refresh
rate", which means there will be less time between your action and the car
reacting. This can vary from as little as 5.5 milliseconds, all the way to more
than 30 milliseconds. This can feel a bit like "lag" in a video game, in the
extreme, but 30 ms is about 33 fps, which could be better, but isn't that bad
either. Just like video games, you'll probably find that you can adapt and
"lead" the car a bit to erase the effect, but for the best experience, you
would want the highest refresh rate possible, of course.

Receivers
=========

The most important characteristic of a receiver is whether it is compatible
with your transmitter! Past the basic "it works" level, some transmitter need
specific receivers for some of their features. For example, with my Spektrum
DX4R Pro radio, the SR2000 allows for a 5.5 ms refresh rate, but with the
SR410, it is only 11 ms (but has four channels instead of two, in exchange).

Some receivers also have extended features, like telemetry (allowing to
transmit *back* information like motor temperature or speed, etc), or driving
assistances (traction control, ABS braking, stability control). Many of those
features are not allowed for racing, so I did not investigate these much.

Often, transmitters will include a receiver, but check whether that is the
case, as this will be an additional cost you might not expect.

Which One?
==========

With the information above, I think you can make a decision that suits your
budget, but I would add that, in my experience, radios are a lasting
investment, which you can carry over from one car to the next, as you upgrade
the rest of your kit. This is especially true if it has model memories, so you
can save money if you get more than one car (otherwise, you'd have to buy
another transmitter).

In terms of brands, Sanwa (also known as Airtronics in the US/Canada) and
Futaba as known as the best, but are also the most expensive. Spektrum is also
well regarded (they invented the 2.4 GHz technology that they are all using
now), but for some reason, have a better reputation for airplane radios?
Myself, I got a Spektrum DX4R Pro, as I found that I could get Spektrum's top
of the line radio, for less than the price of a Sanwa MT-4S (their "club racer"
model, near the top of their line). It is lacking in some features (no LiPo
pack, I use rechargeable AA batteries with it), but seems to have the important
features, at a good price point.
